Fears are growing about a potential full
blown war
between Israel and Hezbollah
militants in Lebanon.
Right now,
Israel and Hezbollah
are trading increasingly intense threats.
The latest from the leader of Hezbollah,
Hassan Nasrallah,
who says if a war breaks out,
the group will target Cyprus.
The nearby island nation
that is a member of the European Union.
Earlier, Israel warned
the possibility of war
is getting very close
after Hezbollah released
this threatening drone video
purporting to show
sensitive
Israeli military
as well as civilian sites.
Tensions between Israel and Hezbollah
have been rising ever since
the October 7th attacks by Hamas,
but especially here in recent weeks.
We have former defense secretary
from the Trump administration,
Mark Esper, with us now.
He also serves on the board
or as a strategic advisor
for several aerospace
and defense related companies.
Sir, we see this
Hezbollah drones,
the message loud and clear.
But these drones have also
been rather effective at evading Israeli
air defense, hitting Israeli
military sites,
even civilian homes in northern Israel.
And U.S.
officials, we've learned, are worried
that Israeli systems,
including Iron
Dome, will not be able to keep up.
How concerned are you about this?
Short.
Beyond. Look, we should be concerned.
And this has been a been a concern now
since the beginning
of the conflict in Gaza.
since that time, Hezbollah
has been shooting
rockets and drones
into Israel from the north,
nearly every day.
And, at this point,
they've caused a handful of Israelis
to be killed.
But but,
you know, they also have displaced
well over 60,080 thousand Israelis
from northern Israel.
So they've been displaced for some time.
I'm very concerned about this
because we're now
seeing a real escalation
in terms of the rhetoric.
I think what,
Hezbollah did with regard
to sending that drone, over Israel,
over the port of Haifa
was, was a clear threat,
a warning that we can see you
and if we can see you, we can shoot you.
And that's important
because we know that Hezbollah
has an inventory of well over
150,000 rockets and missiles,
which could do a lot,
quite a lot of damage
to all parts of Israel.
What would a two front war mean
in this conflict,
and also specifically for the
US as Israel's main patron?
Well, fighting
across two fronts is hard
because of course, it
draws resources, one from each.
And,
maybe the Israeli view is
that they are wrapping up
operations in Rafah that they can turn
to, I'm sorry, in Gaza
so that they can turn to, Hezbollah
now in the North.
They've been talking about this,
hinting about this for some time.
There are parts of the Israeli government
that have wanted to,
to stir things up with,
Hezbollah in the north.
And maybe they're reaching this point
right now,
I think, for the United States.
Look, we're
trying to get the Middle East
to simmer down and not expand.
And yet this would be quite an expansion.
Keep in mind that Hamas,
while it had an estimated 30,000
or so fighters
in a small swath of territory.
Hassan Nasrallah,
the leader of,
Hezbollah, has claimed
to have over 100,000 fighters.
And so you could see
a much broader conflict.
And then on top of this,
we've got to keep in mind, strategically,
geopolitically,
Iran is in the midst
of a leadership transition.
And we should know
by the end of this month
who the next president of Iran is
and what direction
will he take the country,
particularly with regard
to this conflict in the Middle East?
I wonder what you make of the fighting
between Benjamin
Netanyahu and the IDF,
because the IDF, spokesperson
Daniel Hager
said, those
who think Israel can make Hamas
disappear are wrong.
I mean, paging Benjamin
Netanyahu loud and clear here.
He's been very critical of the IDF lately
and his office pushed back on that.
Who's right here?
Well, the IDF spokesman was right.
He's correct.
I mean, we've all been saying
for some time, you cannot destroy Hamas.
It's it's an an ideology, a theology.
It's a it's a cult. Right.
now, what you can do is
you can neutralize its leadership,
which I've argued and others have.
You can
you can
decimate the ranks of its fighters
to make sure that they're no longer
combat ineffective.
But in terms of completely destroying
and eradicating them is not possible.
What you have to do
is, again, to take out the leadership,
remove their warfighting capability,
and then you have to have a,
a police or a security presence
on the ground to continue to kind of,
as we say,
keep mowing the lawn every now
and then
to make sure that the right fighters
don't rise up.
So look, I think the spokesman was right.
you see this growing split between,
the IDF and the political leadership,
which is quite curious.
We saw when,
Benny Gantz left the government
a couple weeks ago.
Gantz, of course, was an opposition
political leader
and a former head of the IDF military.
And I think lastly, Brianna,
we saw just the other day
over the weekend,
it seemed to catch the surprise
of Netanyahu
that the IDF called
for a tactical pause in operations
in, in Gaza to allow for the,
humanitarian aid to get through.
And that really caught
the government off guard.
And it was others in
the government have objected.
So we see a growing rift
now between the military
and its political leaders.
Yeah.
You seem surprised
and also pretty ticked off by it.
It was very clear.
Secretary Esper,
we always appreciate you being on.
Thank you so much.